spec: Add tool registration for Apps, to be called by Host (WebMCP-style!) (#72)
modelcontextprotocol/ext-apps: specification/draft/apps.mdx

    structuredContent?: object,    // Optional structured data for UI
    isError?: boolean,             // True if tool execution failed
    _meta?: object                 // Optional metadata
  }
}

// Error Response
{
  jsonrpc: "2.0",
  id: 1,
  error: {
    code: number,
    message: string
  }
}
```

**App Behavior:**
- Apps MUST implement `oncalltool` handler if they declare `tools` capability
- Apps SHOULD validate tool names and arguments
- Apps MAY use `app.registerTool()` SDK helper for automatic validation
- Apps SHOULD return `isError: true` for tool execution failures

`tools/list` - List App-registered tools

```typescript
// Request (Host → App)
{
  jsonrpc: "2.0",
  id: 2,
  method: "tools/list",
  params: {
    cursor?: string  // Optional pagination cursor
  }
}

// Response (App → Host)
{
  jsonrpc: "2.0",
  id: 2,
  result: {
    tools: Array<Tool>,  // List of available tools
    nextCursor?: string  // Pagination cursor if more tools exist
  }
}
```

**Tool Structure:**
```typescript
interface Tool {
  name: string;                    // Unique tool identifier
  description?: string;            // Human-readable description

>   inputSchema: object;             // JSON Schema for arguments

Reviewer: Should we also add an [`outputSchema`, to match MCP tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/server/tools#output-schema)?

Author: Yes — and the SDK already had it end-to-end (`registerTool` accepts/validates `outputSchema` and serializes it in `tools/list`); the spec block was just incomplete. Added it in 190c9f46, and 4e8bc293 rounds out the Tool Structure block with `title`/`_meta` and links to the [core MCP `Tool` type](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/server/tools#tool) so it's clear these are wire-identical. 4e8bc293 also fixes a small SDK bug where `tools/list` emitted an empty `outputSchema` even when none was declared.

Note: Tools with `visibility: ["app"]` are hidden from the agent but remain callable by apps via `tools/call`. This enables UI-only interactions (refresh buttons, form submissions) without exposing implementation details to the model. See the Visibility section under Resource Discovery for details.

### App-Provided Tools

Apps can register their own tools that hosts and agents can call, making apps **introspectable and accessible** to the model. This complements the existing capability where apps call server tools (via host proxy).

#### Motivation: Semantic Introspection

Without tool registration, apps are black boxes to the model:

> - Model sees visual output (screenshots) but not semantic state

Reviewer: How are these acquired? So far the spec relegates this to a "future advancement", but this almost implies it's an existing capability.

Author: Good catch — that parenthetical referred to the screenshot APIs that were since pulled from this branch (`ui/screenshot`/`ui/click` were removed in the 2026-03-26 merge). There's no visual introspection channel today and there shouldn't be one implied. Reworded the whole bullet block in 190c9f46 and again in cbc27800 to drop the implication: the iframe may be opaque to the host (if `frameDomains` is defined and the app nests cross-origin frames), and even where it isn't, DOM access isn't part of the host↔app contract. Thanks for flagging.

> - Model cannot query app state without DOM parsing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Model cannot query the app's state, since it cannot synchronously access its DOM
```

Author: Agree, and went further in cbc27800: the host has *no guaranteed* DOM access into the app at all — apps may embed cross-origin iframes via `frameDomains`, and even where same-origin, DOM access isn't part of the host↔app contract. So "without DOM parsing" understated it; the new text says the tool surface is the only reliable introspection path. Updated the matching mentions in Use Cases and Rationale too.

- Model cannot discover what operations are available

With tool registration, apps expose semantic interfaces:
- Model discovers available operations via `tools/list`
- Model queries app state via tools (e.g., `get_board_state`)
- Model executes actions via tools (e.g., `make_move`)
- Apps provide structured data instead of requiring HTML/CSS interpretation

> This is a different model from approaches where apps keep the model informed through side channels (e.g., OAI Apps SDK sending widget state changes to the model, MCP-UI adding tool call results to chat history). Instead, the agent actively queries app state and executes operations through tools.

Reviewer: I'm curious to hear more about "OAI Apps SDK sending widget state changes to the model". Is that how this was done "before", via bespoke [`setWidgetState()` calls](https://developers.openai.com/apps-sdk/build/state-management#2-ui-state-ephemeral)?

Author: Yes — `window.openai.setWidgetState()` is the OAI mechanism. The original framing here only cited external analogues because this PR predates `ui/update-model-context` (#125 landed 2026-01-12, after #72 was opened) — so at the time the spec genuinely had no push channel of its own. It does now, and 190c9f46/cbc27800 rewrite the paragraph accordingly: tool registration is **pull**, complementing the **push** of `ui/update-model-context`; apps may use either or both. Also fixed the Rationale bullet that still said "rather than apps pushing state."

**Host Capability: `serverTools`**

When present, the host can proxy calls from the app to MCP server tools.

- `listChanged` (boolean, optional): If `true`, the host will send `notifications/tools/list_changed` when server tools change

These capabilities are independent - an app can have one, both, or neither.

**TypeScript Types:**

```typescript
interface McpUiAppCapabilities {
  tools?: {
    listChanged?: boolean;
  };
}

interface McpUiHostCapabilities {
  serverTools?: {
    listChanged?: boolean;
  };
  openLinks?: {};
  logging?: {};
}
```

### Extensibility

This specification defines the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) for MCP Apps.

**Included in MVP:**

- **App-Provided Tools:** Apps can register tools via `app.registerTool()` that agents can call
  - Bidirectional tool flow (Apps consume server tools AND provide app tools)
  - Full lifecycle management (enable/disable/update/remove)
  - Schema validation with Zod
  - Tool list change notifications

**Content Types (deferred from MVP):**

- `externalUrl`: Embed external web applications (e.g., `text/uri-list`)

> **Advanced Tool Features (future extensions):**

Reviewer 2: Apps are in a way even more ephemeral than tool calls or servers because their lifecycle is a single rendering of a single turn in a conversation.

For nontrivial work, it would be very cool if I could return a Task from my app's that the host then continues to poll/get updates for on the corresponding MCP server.

Author: Agreed — added a short **Long-Running App Tools** subsection in 87965f60/93dc8d1b that points at [core MCP Tasks](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/utilities/tasks): app `tools/call` MAY be task-augmented, hosts proxy `tasks/*` the same way they proxy `tools/call`, and — since the iframe is render-bounded — apps SHOULD delegate long-lived work to the server via `callServerTool()` and return the server's task handle so the host can keep polling after teardown. Kept it to one paragraph and let the core spec carry the protocol details. Removed the stale "future extension" bullet.
